Clay Beabout | EECS 731 - Jimmy Wrangler | Sept 7, 2020

## Process

### Choosing datasets
For this project I used Kaggle to find datasets. While searching, I found datasets geared towards mental health data. In particular, suicide rates. In the midst of COVID, suicide rates have increased exponentially across the world due to increased isolation and loneliness which exacerbates depressive tendencies. The main crude data set includes 500+ rows due to the nature of the datasets. This is not a very large set because each row covers national data for several countries that maintain their own public mental health data. 

### Cleaning and Transforming datasets
There were a few pieces of missing data in both datasets. All fields with the exception of the country were of the Float type. I replaced all missing fields with mean column values because of this. 

Combining the datasets was rather easy using the pandas `merge` method. By merging on two keys ('Country', 'Sex') I was able to join the datasets easily. Upon merging, two columns ('day_treatment', 'residential_facilities') resulted with several NaN fields. Using `fillna` I was able to update said NaN cells with the mean of the respective parent column.

```
fc_df = pd.merge(df, facilities, on=['Country'])
column_means = fc_df.mean()
fc_df = fc_df.fillna(column_means)
```

## Ideas & Results

### Formulated Ideas 

The majority of my data analysis came from plotting charts using the crude data set and merging said set with the facilities set to develop more precise hypothesis regarding the data. A prominent piece of data among both sets involved categorizing the data by Country and Sex. Using this, I generated a series of other data frames strictly focused on sex and on the top five world powers (USA, Russia, China, France, UK) to narrow the scope of my analysis. 

From prior research to this project, I knew suicide rates across the world include several factors leading an individual to commit suicide. Using the data, I intend on finding the most at-risk countries, age ranges and sexes. These analytics would allow social scientists and psychologists to better predict suicide within communities involving higher at-risk individuals and to provide more calculated assistance to said communities.

## Datasets and Dataframes

### Datasets
- Crude Suicide Rates (Global, 2016), https://kaggle.com/twinkle0705/mental-health-and-suicide-rates?select=Crude+suicide+rates.csv
- Age Standardized Suicide Rates (Globa, 2016), https://kaggle.com/twinkle0705/mental-health-and-suicide-rates?select=Age-standardized+suicide+rates.csv
- Mental Health Facilites (Global, 2016), https://kaggle.com/twinkle0705/mental-health-and-suicide-rates?select=Facilities.csv 
- Population (Global, 2020), https://kaggle.com/tanuprabhu/population-by-country-2020

### Data Frames

*sr_df*
- Dataframe generated by merging the Crude and Age Standardized data sets based on _Country_ and _Sex_. 

*grouped_sr_df*
- Same dataframe as above with the additional grouping based on _Country_ and _Sex_. 

*fc_df*
- Dataframe generated by merging the Crude and Facilities data sets based on _Country_.

*female_df, male_df*
- Dataframes generated from the larger Crude data set split into two separate sets based on _Sex_ to allow for more concise plotting.

*top_five_female_df, top_five_male_df*
- Dataframe generated from the above *female_df* and *male_df* focusing only on countries within the "Top Five World Powers" ['United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland', 'France', 'United States of America', 'Russian Federation', 'China'].

*gross_population_suicide_rate_df*
- With the inclusion of a Gross Population by Country (2020) dataset, I was able to generate a dataframe merging the Population set with the larger Crude data set. This allowed me to notice correlations between gross population and average suicide rate.

## Results 

- African countries hold a high number of suicidal rates. The top five highest female suicide rates by country all come from Africa. The countries include Lesotho, Uganda, Nigeria, Liberia and Zimbabwe. Zimbabwe and Lithuania top the list for highest 

- China (18+ per every 100,000), France (15+) and Russia (11+) ranked among the highest female suicide rates of the top five World Power nations. Russia (65+) staggered above the other four nations with the highest suicidal rate for men. The United Kingdom of Great Britain held the lowest suicidal rates of the Top Five World Powers for both men and women. 

- China and India are the top two countries with the highest number of annual suicides. This isn't a wild finding as both countries have a very high population as of 2020 (China: 1,440,297,825, India: 1,382,345,085). The countries that follow in highest number of suicides in order are Nigeria, Ethiopia, Japan, Uganda, Brazil, Bangladesh, Indonesia and France. While Ethiopia and Uganda rank among the top six in annual suicide numbers, they also come in 8th and 10th for overall population among the ten countries. 

